2010 04 12 Study Session
LAKEWOOD CIT Y COUNCIL
ST UDY SESSION MINUT ES

Monday, April 12, 2010
City of Lakewood Police Station
Multi-Purpose Room
9401 Lakewood Drive SW
Lakewood, WA 98499

CALL T O ORDER

Mayor Richardson called the meeting to order at 7:03 p.m.

ROLL CALL

Councilmembers Present: 6 – Mayor Douglas Richardson; Deputy Mayor Don Anderson; Councilmembers Mary Moss, Mike Brandstetter,
Jason Whalen and Claudia Thomas.

Councilmember Excused: 1 – Councilmember Walter Neary

Public Safety Advisory Committee Members Present: - Richard Bieber, Chair; Carroll “Ray” Dotson, Alan Hart, and Kalina Marie Miller.

IT EMS FOR DISCUSSION:

Joint meet ing wit h t he Public Saf et y Advisory Commit t ee.

Mayor Richardson welcomed members of the Public Safety Advisory Committee (PSAC). PSAC Chair Bieber introduced members of the
PSAC present.

Chair Bieber reviewed the significant accomplishments of the PSAC in 2009. He then reviewed the Committee’s Work Plan for 2010.
The Committee asked for Council’s clarification on the PSAC’s role as the definitions of their charge seemed broad in scope.

Discussion ensued on the Council having periodic reviews of its Committees, Boards and Commissions (CABC) role and responsibilities in
order to help CABCs with guidance in carrying out their responsibilities. It was further discussed that the PSCA could be involved in
matters of reviewing the Police accreditation process and the Community Service Resource Team program. Challenges in obtaining
public input and involvement were also discussed until there was a particular issue at hand. It was suggested that PSAC could also be
involved with monitoring the recent driving with license suspended ordinance, potentially studying a fireworks ordinance, developing an
inventory of resources relative to emergency management for disaster preparedness; involving the Youth Council and providing
outreach in the National Night Out program.

City Council Study Session Minutes

-2-

April 12, 2010

Mayor Richardson indicated that on June 7 and 8, 2010, the Utilities Transportation Commission will be holding hearings on the at-grade
rail crossings for the Pt. Defiance Rail Bypass project. He suggested that the PSAC become versed on this matter and provide testimony
at the hearing.

Speaking before the Council was:

Dennis Haugen, Lakewood resident, spoke about hiring a specialized attorney on railroads to provide assistance on the rail crossing
issues.

Amending t he Int ernat ional Building Codes.

Assistant City Manager Bugher introduced Mark Nelson, Building Official; Carl Roth, Fire Marshal; Mike Savage, Assistant City Attorney;
and Randy Black, General Manager, Lakewood Water District.

Assistant City Manager Bugher explained that the proposed ordinance provides for the installation of automatic fire sprinkler systems for
new one and two family residential dwellings and townhouse developments exceeding 5,000 square feet.

Discussion ensued on clarifying the difference between apartment buildings/units versus townhouses; what the statistics were on fire
deaths associated with newer residential structures and older structures (ie by age of structure) and mobile homes; if separate water
meters would be required to be installed in townhouses that are sprinklered; and the economic versus safety aspects of the proposed
ordinance.

Further discussion ensued on determining the factors (square footage versus density (number of units)) that should be used in requiring
sprinklers.

Speaking before the Council were:

Glen Spieth, Lakewood Historical Society, spoke about the study the Society had paid for to determine what the cost would be for
improvements for the new Historical Museum and how the proposed codes would affect that study.

Brennen Masters, Tacoma resident, asked for clarification on the difference between the 2006 International Residential Codes and
Lakewood’s code concerning the requirement to sprinkle townhouses.

Bob Mickey, Lakewood resident, spoke about the options on how firewalls are constructed in townhouses in order to meet the two hour
fire rating code and the economic impacts.

Claude Remy, Lakewood resident, expressed concern about his investment in a specific townhouse development project and how the
proposed ordinance would impact his project.

City Council Study Session Minutes

-3-

April 12, 2010

Further discussion ensued on what the Water District estimated would be the cost to bring in a water line into a single family home
(approximately $1,200 - $1,400). It was the consensus of the Council that not all single family residences should be sprinklered. It was
also the consensus of the Council to re-visit the proposed ordinance relative to the 2009 International Building Code and International
Residential Code at another study session and to bring forth an amendment to the 2006 International Fire Code reflecting density
(number of units) for the Council’s consideration at their April 19, 2010 meeting.

BRIEFING BY T HE CIT Y MANAGER

City Manager Neiditz reported that the Colonial Center Theatre Redevelopment Study Request for Proposal is underway.

City Manager Neiditz reported that an update on the Ft. Steilacoom Park restrooms and golf course will be coming before the Council.

City Manager Neiditz reported on the developments of a Thai and Vietnamese restaurant on Ardmore and Steilacoom Boulevard and a
Chinese restaurant on South Tacoma Way.

He also reported in response to an article about University Place, that Lakewood like University Place, has a regional growth center
designation from the Pierce County Regional Council.

He indicated that staff is preparing for the June 7 and 8, 2010 Utilities Transportation Commission public hearings.

IT EMS T ENT AT IVELY SCHEDULED FOR T HE APRIL 19, 2010 REGULAR CIT Y COUNCIL MEET ING:

1. Proclamation declaring April 24, 2010 as Parks Appreciation Day. – Mr. Roger Laybourn, Chair, Parks and Recreation Advisory Board

1. Proclamation declaring April 26, 2010 as Domestic Violence Awareness Day. – Ms. Susan Adams, Director, Family Justice Center
and Ms. Miriam Barnett, Executive Director, YWCA

1. This is the date set for a public hearing by the City Council on the Five Year FY 2010-2015 Consolidated Plan, FY 2010 Annual Action
Plan and FY 2006 and FY 2008 Consolidated Plan amendments and proposed use of funds for CDBG and HOME.

1. This is the date set for a public hearing by the City Council relative to the abatement of dangerous buildings and a public nuisance
at 15013 Union Avenue SW. (Richard Hilton)

City Council Study Session Minutes

-4-

April 12, 2010

1. This is the date set for a public hearing by the City Council relative to the abatement of dangerous buildings and a public nuisance
at 12706 Pacific Highway SW. (Hyun Park)

1. Amending the International Building Codes. – (Ordinance – Regular Agenda)

1. Appointing an individual to serve on the Human Services Funding Advisory Board. – (Motion – Regular Agenda)

1. Awarding a bid for the construction of overlay improvements on Gravelly Lake Drive SW from 100th Street to Bridgeport Way SW
(e1160). – (Motion – Regular Agenda)

1. Awarding a bid for the construction of stormwater facilities on 59th Avenue SW from Bridgeport Way SW and Gravelly Lake Drive
SW (e2031). – (Motion – Regular Agenda)

1. Authorizing the execution of an agreement with the Washington Auto Theft Prevention Authority, in the amount of $500,000, for
the auto theft reduction program from July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2011. – (Motion – Regular Agenda)

CIT Y COUNCIL COMMENT S

Councilmember Brandstetter commented on the closure of QFC and asked that some acknowledgement be given to QFC for the
support they had provided to the community while they were here.

Councilmember Brandstetter thanked the Mayor for providing additional proclamations recognizing Vietnam Veterans Month that he
could distribute to former Vietnam veterans.

Councilmember Thomas suggested that street banners be erected to recognize our troops.

Councilmember Moss also asked that she be provided with Vietnam Veterans Month proclamations that she could distribute to the
Lakewood Chambers Military Affairs Committee.

Councilmember Whalen spoke about the QFC and Hollywood Video store closures. He asked that the Council be periodically updated on
economic development activities.

Deputy Mayor Anderson asked if Dicks Sporting Goods had been approached for potential economic development in Lakewood.

Mayor Richardson asked about the closure of Gravelly Lake Drive and Pacific Highway and where that traffic will be detoured during the
closure.

City Council Study Session Minutes

-5-

April 12, 2010

Mayor Richardson asked that the Council be briefed about e-verify and how it is working.

Mayor Richardson thanked Community Development for the training sessions they have provided on how to get a building permit.

ADJOURNMENT

There being no further business, the meeting adjourned at 10:05 p.m.

_____________________________________
DOUGLAS G. RICHARDSON, MAYOR

ATTEST:

____________________________
ALICE M. BUSH, MMC
CITY CLERK

