2010 06 28 Study Session
LAKEWOOD CIT Y COUNCIL
ST UDY SESSION MINUT ES

Monday, June 28, 2010
City of Lakewood
City Council Chambers
6000 Main Street SW
Lakewood, WA 98499

CALL T O ORDER

Mayor Richardson called the meeting to order at 7:01 p.m.

ROLL CALL

Councilmembers Present: 5 – Mayor Douglas Richardson; Deputy Mayor Don Anderson; Councilmembers Mike Brandstetter, Walter
Neary and Claudia Thomas.

Councilmember Excused: 2 – Councilmembers Jason Whalen and Mary Moss (arrived at 7:13 p.m.)

IT EMS FOR DISCUSSION:

Review of t he Supplement al Budget .

City Manager Neiditz explained that the 2010 supplemental budget shows a decline in revenue compared to earlier projections.

He called on Assistant City Manager Halladay who reviewed the supplemental budget, noting the changes to three funds: General Fund
($499,100 cuts in expenditures), Capital Improvement Fund (Ft. Steilacoom Park restroom construction) and the Equipment Replacement
Fund. He added that the changes include the elimination of the Risk Manager position; a longer time period for replacing information
systems equipment; reducing professional service contracts; a reduction of 1 FTE in Community Development; reduction of $50,000 in
Public Works contracts; rebuilding fleet vehicles instead of replacement; the timing of police hiring; and providing Court security to
include adding a 1 FTE Police Sergeant position.

Councilmember Neary asked how the Risk Manager functions are being carried out, and what value has the City lost without the
position. City Manager Neiditz indicated that Lakewood is part of a new insurance pool with WCIA which compares Lakewood’s claims
with other cities of comparable size and provides risk analysis reports and trends.

City Council Study Session Minutes

-2-

June 28, 2010

Councilmember Neary asked what kind of information systems equipment is being extended for replacement that the City will not be
purchasing. He further asked for clarification on the budget impact on the Community Development activities and the impact on plans for
economic development.

**********

Councilmember Moss arrived at 7:13pm.

**********

Discussion ensued about Public Works’ reduction in contracts involving the facilities budget, fleet, building maintenance and security at
Sound Transit; concerns about the permitting process and City’s back up plan when permitting applications start to increase; what
analysis was done in adding a Police Sergeant position for Court security versus other staffing needs such as in the permitting area and
what other responsibilities that the Sergeant position would be doing. City Manager Neiditz indicated that the City staff looked at various
alternatives and did a further analysis prior to coming up with this recommended position. He explained that the Court Sergeant will be
supervising two Court Compliance Officers, transporting defendants to jail and overseeing electronic monitoring and provide for building
security, with University Place also utilizing the City’s court services.

Further discussion ensued on the equipment replacement fund, the impact of the $175,000 cost savings by deferring the hiring of police
officer positions; and rebuilding of vehicles.

Review of t he Six-Year (2011-2016) T ransport at ion Improvement Program.

City Manager Neiditz acknowledged members of the Citizens Transportation Advisory Committee and the Association of Washington
Cities representatives present. He indicated that the formation of a Transportation Benefit District will be brought before the Council for
consideration.

Transportation Division Manager Winkler presented a Powerpoint presentation showing eight months of work in creating the final draft of
the Six-Year TIP; the recommended project prioritization criteria, the present pavement infrastructure condition, and the transportation
funding analysis and revenue sources recommendation.

Mr. Bill Larkin, Citizens Transportation Advisory Committee (CTAC) Chair, provided an overview of CTAC’s recommendations on the SixYear Transportation Improvement Program, which is required by law, and indicated that it may be revised but only after a public hearing
is conducted on the amendments. He spoke about the prioritization criteria relative to implementing safety improvements, need to
maintain existing infrastructure, promote corridor flow, maximize grant funds, and develop other improvement projects.

City Council Study Session Minutes

-3-

June 28, 2010

Discussion ensued on how the prioritization criteria correlates to the TIP development overview and how it relates to the goals of the
comprehensive plan; the difference in #1 and #14 safety improvements; and whether the five correctable locations have been
identified.

Transportation Division Manager Winkler indicated that the high accident locations and safety improvements are identified on an ongoing
basis with available grants and funds; and utilizing the prioritization criteria the best way possible. She then reviewed the highlights of
the TIP and challenges.

Mr. Ashley Probart, AWC Legislative and Policy Advocate/Municipal Associate, explained the features of the Transportation Benefit District
(TBD), its purpose and formation, and the restrictions on how TBD is to be used. He further explained the process, eligible TBD projects,
revenue options (i.e. either Councilmanic where voter approval is not required through vehicle license fee/commercial and industrial
impact fee, or voter approved, where it can be less than citywide); estimated annual revenue examples for Lakewood; jurisdictions who
have implemented a TBD; and legislative changes.

Discussion ensued on how the voter-approved process would work; the permitted uses for the funds by referencing it as part of the TIP;
whether it is feasible to implement TBD at targeted or partial areas where improvements are needed (voter approved) versus full
citywide implementation or overlapped; the level of discussion with CTAC and informing citizens on which types of road maintenance
projects that need to be funded; whether the TBD may be voted only by the segment that is affected if less than district wide; how
specific does the transportation improvements need to be in the TBD; how to remit funds and what the provisions are if funds are not
spent; a provision that the City may accept grants or other funding sources to leverage.

Further discussion ensued on the current rate of the County road tax ($1.41 per thousand) and how to generate $900,000 in addition to
the one percent property tax; what is the most cost-effective way to maintain streets and “slow” the deterioration of roads (chip seal at
local access roads versus overlay); and the safety improvements on Angle Lane/Hipkins Road.

Mr. Levi Williamson, CTAC member, expressed concern on the state of the City’s pavements, which is what many roads in Tacoma are
experiencing currently.

Council expressed their appreciation of the work of the Public Works staff and Citizens Transportation Advisory Committee.

Brief ing on t he Of f ice of Economic Adjust ment I-5 t ransport at ion project .

City Manager Neiditz commented on the I-5 transportation project executive summary of the Department of Defense Office of Economic
Adjustment (OEA)-

City Council Study Session Minutes

-3-

June 28, 2010

funded Growth Planning study for Joint Base Lewis-McChord, in partnership with Washington State Department of Transportation
(WSDOT).

Associate Planner Dan Penrose, OEA Grants Project Manager, presented an overview of the Interstate 5 (I-5) project and indicated that
the project is a collaborative effort between the Transpo Group, WSDOT, the City and other stakeholders. He added that it involved 6-7
technical reviews, and incorporated military troops into a traffic model which has not been done before.

Mr. Bruce Haldors, President, The Transpo Group, spoke about the process used to identify a more focused area of analysis 11-mile
section of I-5 to develop a series of alternatives with the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) who will ultimately approve the design
and help fund this project. He added that there is an ongoing active process to pursue grants to conduct the next stage of the project
and continue work with the military base to identify their needs and regionally.

Mr. Craig Helman, WSDOT, spoke about how the traffic model process with military is unique in that there are four access gates with the
highest volume at an average of 150,000 people each day, in addition to the number of vehicles going through I-5. He added that the
study is now focused on four interchanges – Thorne Lane, Berkeley Avenue SW, 41st Division Drive and the Dupont-Steilacoom Road.
He then explained a simulated graphic video showing design alternatives for bringing the ramps into one central location.

Mr. Haldors indicated that a final report will be published in about two weeks after public outreach meetings with stakeholders such as,
Pierce County, City of Dupont and Puget Sound Regional Council are held.

Discussion ensued on interchanges on Thorne Lane and whether it is consistent with the Cross Base Highway; how this relates to the
transportation grant for the growth coordination planning effort at Dupont-Steilacoom Road; and how the transit system functions in all
these.

BRIEFING BY T HE CIT Y MANAGER

City Manager Neiditz reported on the successful SummerFest event which had a huge crowd turnout.

City Manager Neiditz indicated that the Association of Washington Cities conference was held in Vancouver, WA with Councilmembers
Moss and Neary participating.

City Manager Neiditz indicated that the Washington State Department of Transportation is initiating an environmental assessment
relative to the Point Defiance Bypass project.

City Manager Neiditz indicated that in order to implement the Revised Code of Washington law on wireless communication device while
driving and cite offenders

City Council Study Session Minutes

-4-

June 28, 2010

in Lakewood, and because it was not included as part of the State’s Model Traffic Code, City staff recommends that it be codified in the
City’s code for Council’s adoption at the July 6, 2010 Council meeting.

IT EMS T ENT AT IVELY SCHEDULED FOR T UESDAY, JULY 6, 2010 REGULAR CIT Y COUNCIL MEET ING:

1. This is the date set for a public hearing by the City Council on the Six-Year (2011-2016) Transportation Improvement Program.

1. Appointing an individual to serve on the Redevelopment Advisory Board through May 23, 2013. – (Motion – Regular Agenda)

1. Authorizing a special assessment and lien against the property at 5421 Chicago Avenue SW for the abatement of public nuisances
and dangerous buildings. (Salvador Lopez & Maria Lopez-Gonzalez). – (Resolution – Regular Agenda)

1. Authorizing a special assessment and lien against the property at 8301 Custer Road SW for the abatement of public nuisances and
dangerous buildings. (Tommy D. & Nadine F. Browning). – (Resolution – Regular Agenda)

1. Adopting policy on the Use of Wireless Communication Devices While Driving. – (Ordinance – Regular Agenda)

1. Adopting the 2010 Supplemental Budget. – (Ordinance – Regular Agenda)

CIT Y COUNCIL COMMENT S

None.

ADJOURNMENT

There being no further business, the meeting adjourned at 9:36 p.m.

_____________________________________
DOUGLAS G. RICHARDSON, MAYOR

ATTEST:

____________________________
ALICE M. BUSH, MMC
CITY CLERK

