2010 11 01
LAKEWOOD CIT Y COUNCIL MINUT ES

Monday, November 1, 2010
City of Lakewood
City Council Chambers
6000 Main Street SW
Lakewood, WA 98499

CALL T O ORDER

Mayor Richardson called the meeting to order at 7:02 p.m.

ROLL CALL

Councilmembers Present: 7 – Mayor Douglas Richardson; Deputy Mayor Don Anderson; Councilmembers Mary Moss, Mike Brandstetter,
Jason Whalen, Walter Neary and Claudia Thomas.

FLAG SALUT E
The Pledge of Allegiance was led by Mayor Richardson.

PROCLAMAT IONS AND PRESENT AT IONS

Yout h Council Report .

The Youth Council reported on their participation at Truck and Tractor Day, Lakewood’s Promise celebration, Make A Difference Day, and
various activities at each of the high schools.

REPORT S BY T HE CIT Y MANAGER

City Manager Neiditz noted that, in honor of the four fallen police officers, he announced that the dedication of the Police Memorial is
scheduled for November 29, 2010, at 10:00 a.m.

City Manager Neiditz reported that a launching of the University Place Municipal Court will be held on November 30, 2010 at 6:30 p.m. in
the Council Chambers.

City Manager Neiditz reported that the State audit and accountability audit by the State Auditor resulted in no findings and no
management letter. He added that the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development reported that the Consolidated Annual
Performance Evaluation Report was completed satisfactorily.

City Manager Neiditz then commented on the bicycle event held at Ft. Steilacoom Park over the weekend.

Clover Park School Dist rict Board Report .

Clover Park School District (CPSD) Board Director Walt Kellcy complimented the services of the Youth Council. He thanked the Police
Department on a community event that the Police Department participated in with the youth. He spoke about the progress of the
construction at Lakes High School. He indicated that the CPSD Board is planning to hold their Board meeting at the Performance Arts
Center on March 14, 2011. He explained that design work is progressing on the construction of Hudtloff Middle School.

Mr. Kellcy indicated that Superintendent LeBeau met with the Joint Base Lewis-McChord relative to schools on the military base.

Mr. Kellcy distributed copies of the Accountability Plan for implementing the CPSD Board priorities and district goals for 2010-2011.

Parks and Recreat ion 20 year st rat egic plan / Legacy Plan updat e

Parks and Recreation Director Dodsworth reviewed the purpose of the Lakewood Legacy Plan which is to create a 20-year park and
recreation strategic plan to address future park and recreation needs and create a vision and funding options.

Discussion ensued on preparing a “bold” legacy plan; and how is the non-motorized plan being incorporated in the legacy plan.

Mr. Jason Gerwen, Legacy Plan team member, spoke about the efforts of the Legacy Plan team and its process.

Further discussion ensued as to what extent and how broad is the Legacy Plan being considered when there are other facilities such as
Chambers Creek, Tillicum boat launch and others that are not City parks.

PUBLIC COMMENT S

Speaking before the Council were:

Becky Huber, Lakewood Historical Society, spoke about the Make a Difference Day event on October 23, 2010. She announced that the
next Lakewood Historical Society meeting is scheduled for November 9, 2010, at the Little Church on the Prairie, at 7:00 p.m.

Dennis Haugen, Lakewood resident, spoke about the reduction of 19 full-time employees in the City’s budget.

Jim Taylor, Lakewood resident, thanked the City for assistance with the Habitat for Humanity projects in Tillicum. He spoke about the
nationwide voting for Habitat for Humanity in Tillicum project in order to receive funding for a Habitat project.

C O N S E N T

A G E N D A

A.

Approval of the minutes of the City Council Budget Workshop of October 13, 2010.

B.

Approval of the minutes of the City Council meeting of October 18, 2010.

C.

Approval of the minutes of the City Council Budget Workshop of October 25, 2010.

D.
Approval of payroll check numbers 231 and 112278 to 112291, and direct deposit check numbers 112766 to 113024, in the
amount of $864,623.11, for the period October 1 - 15, 2010.

E.
Approval of claim voucher numbers 900199 and 58532 to 58634, in the amount of $578,609.81, for the period ending October 21,
2010.

F.

Approval of claim voucher numbers 58635 to 58716, in the amount of $764,248.59, for the period ending October 28, 2010.

G.

Items Filed in the Office of the City Clerk:
1.

Planning Advisory Board meeting minutes of September 15, 2010.

COUNCILMEMBER THOMAS MOVED TO ADOPT THE CONSENT AGENDA AS PRESENTED. SECONDED BY COUNCILMEMBER MOSS. VOICE
VOTE WAS TAKEN AND CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY.

Councilmember Whalen noted a scrivener’s error on page 3 of the October 13, 2010 Council Budget Workshop minutes under Closed
Session, which should read that Councilmember Whalen instead of Councilmember Neary announced the closed session.

R E G U L A R

A G E N D A

PUBLIC HEARINGS AND APPEALS

T his is t he dat e set f or a public hearing by t he Cit y Council on t he preliminary 2011-2012 Biennial Budget and 2011
propert y t ax levy rat e.

Speaking before the Council were:

Becky Huber, Lakewood resident, spoke about the lodging tax funds and asked for an additional $12,000 for the Lakewood Historical
Society.

Glen Spieth, Lakewood resident, spoke in support of an additional $12,000 lodging tax funds for the Lakewood Historical Society.

Kelly Phanco, Early Learning, First 5 Fundamentals, thanked the Council for supporting the Early Learning program.

Lora Wiltfong, Lakewood resident, thanked the Council for past support of the Senior Center.

Carolyn Howard, Lakewood resident, spoke about the Senior Center and what it means to many seniors.

Billie Finley, Lakewood resident, spoke about the Senior Center and her experience at the Center and thanked the Council for
supporting the Center.

Jason Gerwen, Lakewood resident, spoke in support of the Parks and Recreation Department and the challenges with funding Ft.
Steilacoom Park, creating an ongoing sustaining funding stream for parks and developing a City identity.

Dennis Haugen, Lakewood resident, spoke about concerns relative to economic development and the Economic Development
Department.

There being no further testimony, the hearing was declared closed.

APPOINT MENT S

Mot ion No. 2010-40 reappoint ing Bill Larkin and Charlie Maxwell t o serve on t he Cit izens T ransport at ion Advisory
Commit t ee t hrough November 5, 2013.

COUNCILMEMBER NEARY MOVED TO CONFIRM THE reAPPOINTMENTs OF BILL LARKIN AND CHARLIE MAXWELL TO SERVE ON THE CITIZENS
TRANSPORTATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE THROUGH NOVEMBER 5, 2013. SECONDED BY COUNCILMEMBER WHALEN. VOICE VOTE WAS
TAKEN AND CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY.

UNFINISHED BUSINESS

None.

NEW BUSINESS

None.

BRIEFING BY T HE CIT Y MANAGER

City Manager Neiditz reported that City staff plans to update the NEPA environmental assessment relative to Tillicum sewers through a
consultant contract with Parametrix, for approximately $11,000.

City Manager Neiditz reported that a settlement with Courtney Nelson, former Community Service Officer, was settled by the City’s
former insurance carrier, in the amount of $55,000.

City Manager Neiditz spoke about a webpage workshop which was held with seven Committees, Boards and Commissions
representatives to discuss the City’s website.

City Manager Neiditz reported that a Regional Steering Committee meeting for the Joint Base Lewis-McChord Growth Coordination Plan
funded through the Department of Defense Office of Economic Adjustment was held last week in which the former military
commander/City Manager from Monterey, California, was in attendance to discuss regional partnerships to proceed with implementing a
regional partnership with Lakewood leading the effort.

regional partnership with Lakewood leading the effort.

Habit at f or Humanit y housing in T illicum

City Manager Neiditz provided an update on the properties at 14514 and 14427 Washington Avenue SW which the Tacoma-Pierce
County Habitat for Humanity is acquiring to construct low-income housing.

City Manager Neiditz noted that it appears there is Council consensus to proceed with agreements for Habitat to acquire and construct
low-income housing at the two properties.

Legislat ive updat e

Communications/Government Relations Director Jeff Brewster and Ms. Briahna Taylor, of Gordon Thomas Honeywell, reviewed the
proposed 2011-2013 legislative priorities including reducing Interstate-5 congestion through Lakewood, expanding sewers in Tillicum,
limit expansion of gambling businesses, public records act reform, Western State Hospital Policing funding, and tax increment
financing/local revitalization financing.

Discussion ensued on the appropriateness of prioritizing; limiting the expansion of gambling businesses; how is the Council going to
validate the City’s legislative priorities; keeping the expansion of gambling businesses on the legislative priorities list; encouraging
enhancement of technology for public records reform; advocating for Western State Hospital operational funding; if funding isn’t
available at the local level, should tax increment financing be a priority; how does the tax increment financing work; and consideration of
proposed legislation regarding water meters for fire sprinklers.

It was the consensus of the Council to further discuss the City’s legislative priorities prior to the joint meeting with the Legislators.

CIT Y COUNCIL COMMENT S

Councilmember Brandstetter commented on the 100 Best Communities for Young People award and was encouraged that the partners
are carrying out Lakewood’s Promise.

Councilmember Thomas commented on the Lakeview Neighborhood Association meeting she attended and that their next meeting is
not scheduled until January.

Councilmember Thomas commented on a high rail tour she attended.

Councilmember Whalen commented on the web development meeting he attended last week.

Councilmember Whalen announced that he will be attending on a Puget Sound Regional Council Economic Development District meeting
on November 3, 2010 to discuss among other things infrastructure improvements in the Woodbrook area.

Councilmember Whalen commented on the issue of the Amtrak Pt. Defiance Bypass that will be coming up and suggested that the
Council be well informed on the matter. He spoke about legislative priorities where it might be appropriate to add language to mitigate
severe traffic congestion resulting from the continued growth of the Joint Base Lewis-McChord and also to mitigate potential impacts of
the Pt. Defiance Bypass project.

Deputy Mayor Anderson commented on the Park Lodge Elementary School walk from City Hall to dedicate a new sidewalk as a result of
a project grant.

Deputy Mayor Anderson commented on the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board meeting he attended and the discussion about the Ft.
Steilacoom Master Plan including the golf course property.

Deputy Mayor Anderson also spoke about a potential for the City to put “heads in beds” and host the cross country national
championship for high schools and find a facility such as the McGavick Center to hold the pre- and post events.

Mayor Richardson reminded the audience about Election Day tomorrow.

Mayor Richardson clarified why the Veterans Day celebration was planned for November 15, 2010, four days after the holiday.

Mayor Richardson indicated that he plans to add the Merchant Marine flag displayed in the Council Chambers.

Mayor Richardson announced that representatives from our China sister city, Dan Zhou, will be visiting next week and possibly have a
reception for them prior to the start of the November 8, 2010 Budget Workshop.

Mayor Richardson spoke about the Make A Difference Day event. He asked why the Stryker Brigade did not show up during the Truck
and Tractor event.

**********

ADJOURNMENT

There being no further business, the meeting adjourned at 10:30 p.m.

_____________________________________
DOUGLAS G. RICHARDSON, MAYOR

ATTEST:

____________________________
ALICE M. BUSH, MMC
CITY CLERK

