2011 08 01
LAKEWOOD CITY COUNCIL MINUTES
Monday, August 1, 2011
City of Lakewood
City Council Chambers
6000 Main Street SW
Lakewood, WA 98499

CALL TO ORDER
Mayor Richardson called the meeting to order at 7:01 p.m.
ROLL CALL
Councilmembers Present: 4 – Mayor Douglas Richardson; Councilmembers Mary Moss, Jason Whalen and Claudia Thomas.
Councilmembers Excused: 3 – Deputy Mayor Don Anderson and Councilmember Walter Neary and Mike Brandstetter.
FLAG SALUTE
The Pledge of Allegiance was led by Mayor Richardson.
REPORTS BY THE CITY MANAGER
City Manager Neiditz announced that August 2, 2011 is National Night Out in the City of Lakewood.
He reported that the South Sound 911 proposal was approved by the County Council on July 26, 2011 for placing a ballot
measure for funding of the new agency. Also, the County Council approved Lakewood’s sewer franchise with an effective date
of September 1, 2011.
Lastly, he reminded the Council that the Council will be hosting a special meeting on August 22, 2011 with the City Councils of
DuPont and Steilacoom.
PROCLAMATIONS AND PRESENTATIONS
Clover Park School District Board Report.
Clover Park School District (CPSD) Board Director Paul Wagemann provided a progress report on the Lakes High School
construction which is nearly complete. He announced that school starts on September 7, 2011.
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Speaking before the Council were:
William Hubbard, Tillicum resident, spoke about THE NEWS TRIBUNE article by the City Manager and expressed concern
about commercial traffic traveling on Portland Avenue. He spoke about leaving the gate where it currently is.
Bryant Grider, Tillicum resident, spoke about the congestion at Berkeley Avenue and moving the gate near Eagle Point was
concerning and asked that the gate not be moved.
Jennifer Justice, Tillicum resident, spoke against the relocation of the Camp Murray gate and that the $1.2 million funding will
not calm the traffic congestion. She asked that the State provide funding to fix the interchange. She urged blocking access to
Camp Murray to the residential area.
Edmond Dennery, Tillicum resident, spoke against moving the Camp Murray gate to the southwest terminus of Portland
Avenue was not in the best interest of Tillicum. He urged to leave the gate where it is and await future renovations of I-5.
Pat O’Brien, Tillicum resident, thanked the City for the study of Exit 122 and asked for a similar study for Exit 123 off of I-5. He
asked Council to take a vote on this matter.

Brian Dennery, Tillicum resident, spoke about minority businesses along Union Avenue that were not contacted by the City
about the proposed changes. He expressed concern that to send traffic along Portland Avenue was of concern with children
walking along Portland Avenue.
Sharon Warrant, Tillicum resident, spoke about the round about proposed near Eagle Point and that moving the gate will
cause more traffic congestion.
Jan Merriman, Tillicum resident, asked that the Council listen to the Tillicum residents. Major streets, such as Thorne Lane,
Berkeley and Union Avenue will be inadequate for handling an additional 4,000 vehicles. Moving the gate will not relieve
traffic and concerns about emergency vehicle access.
Paul Wagemann, Lakewood resident, spoke about the problems generated by I-5 traffic and moving the gate to mitigate the
traffic impacts the Tillicum residents. He indicated that the problem is resting with the citizens who live in Tillicum and we need
to listen to what the citizens want and to leave the gate where it is.
David Anderson, Tillicum resident, spoke about his conversation with King 5 TV. He spoke about the failures of the gate
relocation study and full review is needed of the I-5 corridor.
Anthony Truxal, Tillicum resident, spoke in opposition of relocating the Camp Murray gate and that it moves the problem south
to an interchange that is even more inadequate which is compounded by Amtrak traffic and the Point Defiance Bypass. He
spoke about the need to study impacts on Exit 123.
Jim Charboneau, Lakewood resident, spoke about the round about that would eliminate some of the traffic from I-5. He spoke
about emergency access to the State Emergency facility on Camp Murray.
Tony Gibbon, Chevron Station owner in Tillicum, spoke about keeping the gate where it is and his appreciation of the business
that is generated from Camp Murray and residents. His second choice was the Portland Avenue change.
Ken Severe, Lakewood resident, spoke about page 24 of the claim vouchers, and noted that $18,000 was paid for a Police
vehicle for repairs, which is high.
Bob Holden, Tillicum resident, spoke about increased property taxes in Tillicum and spoke against the relocation of Camp
Murray gate.
Murray Share, Tillicum resident, spoke about any redirection of traffic from I-5 will create traffic congestion and there has been
no study of the impacts on Thorne Lane. She asked if repaving North Thorne Lane been budgeted, including sidewalks, and
picking up garbage along the streets.
Rick Patterson, Camp Murray representative, spoke about Camp Murray, military, and residents concerns are shared by all and
this has been complex and it will come to some expense to correct the problems. A lot of energy has been expended to review
the options and a study was conducted. Leaving the gate where it is, was not an option. Camp Murray looks forward to
working with the City on this effort.
Robert Schader, Tillicum resident, spoke about better informing the community about the study, and that an environmental
impact study should be done.
Sandra DeVetton, Tillicum resident, spoke about the major problem with the Camp Murray gate is the railroad and Berkeley
Avenue. Maas Lane should be purchased to create a round about.
Robin McKlimens, Tillicum resident, expressed concerns about the gate relocation from a health perspective. The current
proposal will be taking down a lot of trees and I-5 noise will be carried into American Lake. She asked that there be more
research on this matter.
Abby Henny, Tillicum resident, spoke abut representing the families who could not attend tonight’s meeting and expressed
concern about emissions and gases emitted from vehicles and children walking on streets.
Tom James, Tillicum resident, thanked Council for making Tillicum a better place to live. He indicated that the Council
approved the Tillicum Neighborhood Plan and that Portland Avenue was not designed to be a major arterial in the Plan. He
indicated that Portland Avenue is a residential street.
Neil Holden, Silcox Island resident, spoke about Tillicum being an improving neighborhood. He urged Council not to allow the
relocation of the Camp Murray gate.
James Taylor, Tillicum Action Committee, spoke in support of the comments of the Tillicum residents, and asked the Council to

take the residents comments into consideration and not move the Camp Murray gate for the time being.
C O N S E N T

A G E N D A

**********
Council recessed at 8:20 p.m. and recovened at 8:29 p.m.
**********
A.

Approval of the minutes of the City Council meeting of July 18, 2011.

B.

Approval of the minutes of the City Council Study Session of July 25, 2011.

C.
Approval of payroll check numbers 112544 to 112558, and direct deposits and automated clearing house in the amount
of $928,394.17, for the period July 1 – 15, 2011.
D.

Approval of claim voucher numbers 62083 to 62190, in the amount of $271,004.86, for the period ending July 14, 2011.

E.
Approval of claim voucher numbers 62192 to 62288 and 900219 to 900223 in the amount of $1,394,983.21, for the
period ending July 21, 2011.
F.

Items Filed in the Office of the City Clerk:
1. Citizens’ Transportation Advisory Committee meeting minutes of May 24, 2011.
2. Lakewood Arts Commission meeting minutes of June 6, 2011.

COUNCILMEMBER MOSS MOVED TO ADOPT THE CONSENT AGENDA AS PRESENTED. SECONDED BY
COUNCILMEMBER THOMAS. VOICE VOTE WAS TAKEN AND CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY.
R E G U L A R

A G E N D A

UNFINISHED BUSINESS
None.
NEW BUSINESS
Motion No. 2011-27 awarding a bid to Barry Civil Construction, Inc., in the amount of $149,225, for the construction of
stormwater treatment facilities within the existing drainage system along Steilacoom Boulevard SW between Phillips
Road SW and Edgewater Drive SW.
COUNCILMEMBER THOMAS MOVED TO AWARD A BID TO BARRY CIVIL CONSTRUCTION, INC., IN THE AMOUNT OF
$149,225, FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF STORMWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES WITHIN THE EXISTING DRAINAGE
SYSTEM ALONG STEILACOOM BOULEVARD SW BETWEEN PHILLIPS ROAD SW AND EDGEWATER DRIVE SW.
SECONDED BY COUNCILMEMBER WHALEN. VOICE VOTE WAS TAKEN AND CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY.
Motion No. 2011-28 awarding a bid to Northwest Cascade, Inc., in the amount of $497,515, for the 2011 Drywell
Replacement Project.
COUNCILMEMBER moss MOVED TO AWARD A BID TO NORTHWEST CASCADE, INC., IN THE AMOUNT OF $497,515,
FOR THE 2011 DRYWELL REPLACEMENT PROJECT. SECONDED BY COUNCILMEMBER thomas. VOICE VOTE WAS
TAKEN AND CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY.
BRIEFING BY THE CITY MANAGER
City Manager Neiditz spoke about the citizens comments and the tenor of tonight’s meeting about the Camp Murray gate. He
spoke about the disincentive measures being taken on traffic on Union Avenue and Berkeley. He also spoke about mitigation
measures to address safety on Union Avenue. He indicated that discussions will continue with Camp Murray and the
environmental assessment has yet to be received.
City Manager Neiditz commented on the City’s destination study proposals.
He reported on a drowning incident at a park on Thursday, August 4, 2011 evening and extended condolences to the family.

He indicated that the City has sent condolence cards to the families of Brad MacGowan and Ben Sclair.
Councilmember Moss asked if the City could do more to get the information out to citizens about the Camp Murray gate
relocation.
Councilmember Whalen asked what would happen with Camp Murray if the City did not move this project forward. City
Manager Neiditz indicated that if nothing happens by September 30, 2011, (end of the federal fiscal year); federal funds for this
project would go away. Mayor Richardson asked where is the 4,400 traffic going. Discussion ensued on Camp Murray
mitigation measures that Camp Murray could take if the City did nothing.
Assistant City Manager Halladay presented the second quarter 2011 cash basis revenue report. He explained that for the first
half of 2011, the General Fund revenue is at 47 percent of what was budgeted and projected. He explained that the City is
currently 1.1 percent higher in sales tax revenues than in 2010.
CITY COUNCIL COMMENTS
Councilmember Moss commented on a civic leadership tour, C-17 dedication ceremony and the rodeo closing ceremony she
attended.
Councilmember Whalen asked if some form of recognition is being arranged for the Lakewood’s Brightest Star.
Councilmember Whalen expressed concern about the Camp Murray gate relocation matter and the sentiments of the residents
and perhaps now may not be the time to take action on relocating the gate.
ADJOURNMENT
There being no further business, the meeting adjourned at 9:25 p.m.
_____________________________________
DOUGLAS G. RICHARDSON, MAYOR
ATTEST:
____________________________
ALICE M. BUSH, MMC
CITY CLERK

