2014 12 08 Study Session Minutes
LAKEWOOD CITY COUNCIL
STUDY SESSION MINUTES
December 8, 2014
City of Lakewood
City Council Chambers
6000 Main Street SW
Lakewood, WA 98499
CALL TO ORDER
Mayor Anderson called the meeting to order at 7:02 p.m.
ROLL CALL
Councilmembers Present: 7 – Mayor Don Anderson; Deputy Mayor Jason Whalen; Councilmembers Mary Moss, Mike
Brandstetter, John Simpson, Marie Barth and Paul Bocchi.
ITEMS FOR DISCUSSION:
Western State Hospital Update.
Mr. Ron Adler, CEO, Western State Hospital, provided background information and a brief overview of the services provided at
Western State Hospital.
Discussion ensued on the patient population history and the staffing ratio levels; and receiving more information on all the
services provided at the hospital at a future update.
Amending the land use and development code relative to satellite parking lots.
Assistant City Manager Bugher and Planning Manager Catron reviewed a proposed land use amendment for satellite parking
lots.
Discussion ensued on the Planning Advisory Board’s vote on the proposed amendments and if there was there confusion that
used car parking lots would be allowed in the AC2 zone; what can be allowed in the AC2 zone (least critical of the AC zones
generally industrial uses; restrictions on intensity of use in terms of people per acre, performance standards for noise and
limited expansion of single family homes and apartments); are schools allowed in AC2 zones (no); how many days is the
Starlite Swap Meet allowed to be opened; are the land use policies specific to the Starlite proposal to be amended in 2015
(staff is looking to remove satellite parking from the zoning code); confirm that the Planning Advisory Board was looking at the
same policies when the Comprehensive Plan was adopted; what were JBLM’s reasons for having no concerns with the
proposed amendments; how many individuals provided testimony at the public hearing (one); what comments were received
by property owners in the area; how many satellite lots could there be in the AC2 zone; what were the Planning Advisory
Board’s reasons for voting for and against satellite parking lots; how is satellite parking different from on-site parking; how are
parking requirements determined and what would the parking requirement be for the Starlite Swap Meet; are there curbs,
gutters and sidewalks on the Starlite property; and sending this back to the Planning Advisory Board for consideration upon
completion of the Joint land use study.
Review of accounts receivable write-offs.
Assistant City Manager Kraus reviewed the accounts receivable write-offs amounting to $21,295.22.
Discussion ensued on the $10,819.91 damage to property.
Review of the Washington State Treasurer’s Office local option capital asset lending program relative to the LED
streetlights retrofit project.
Assistant City Manager Kraus reviewed the State Treasurer’s Office local option lending program for LED streetlights
conversion in the amount of $1,655,000.

Discussion ensued on the inflation rate; is this a general obligation of the City and how often are payments made (twice a
year).
Review of Third Quarter 2014 Financial Report.
Assistant City Manager Kraus reviewed the third quarter 2014 financial report.
Discussion ensued on what are the sales projections for the Curbside Motors Section 108 loan; and looking at locations for
economic development activity to generate sales tax.
Review of Third Quarter 2014 Police Accreditation Report.
Assistant Police Chief Zaro reviewed the Police accreditation process through the Washington Association of Sheriffs and
Police Chiefs.
Discussion ensued on the use of force and how it is impacting policies; what is the level of legitimacy of the businesses being
conducted at the Starlite Swap Meet; is the law enforcement community working on the records component as it relates to body
camera videos; how the use of body cameras should be a policy decision of the Council; and what are the requirements for
retention of videos.
Review of a proposed amendment to Chapter 2.26 of the Municipal Code to change the name of the Human Services &
CDBG Funding Advisory Board to Community Services Advisory Board.
City Attorney Wachter reviewed the proposed amendments to Chapter 2.26 of the Municipal Code to change the name of the
Human Services and CDBG Funding Advisory Board to Community Services Advisory Board.
BRIEFING BY THE CITY MANAGER
City Manager Caulfield spoke about a major storm heading toward the Puget Sound.
City Manager Caulfied indicated that the Curbside Motors loan closed last week.
He reported that Communications Manager Brent Champaco and IT Manager Ken White is working to launch a new website in
January 2015.
He noted that the court services agreements with the City of University Place, DuPont and Town of Steilacoom is scheduled for
the December 15, 2014 Council meeting.
He reminded the Council that the City Clerk will pick-up Council Ipads for maintenance service after the Council’s December
15, 2014 Council meeting
He announced that on Tuesday, December 9, 2014, at 5:30 p.m., the Joint Council and State Legislators meeting will be held
in the Council Chambers.
Councilmember Brandstetter asked if the Department of Licensing is on track with collecting the $20 car tab licensing fee.
ITEMS TENTATIVELY SCHEDULED FOR THE DECEMBER 15, 2014 REGULAR CITY COUNCIL MEETING:
1. Amending the land use and development code relative to satellite parking lots.
2. Authorizing accounts receivable write-offs.
3. Approving the Washington State Treasurer’s Office local option capital asset lending program relative to the LED streetlights
retrofit project. .
4. Amending Chapter 2.26 of the Lakewood Municipal Code to change the name of the Human Services & CDBG Funding
Advisory Board to Community Services Advisory Board.
5. Business showcase. – Lakewood Hardware & Paint, Inc., Mr. Donn Tyler
6. Appointing a member to the Landmarks and Heritage Advisory Board through December 31, 2017.
7. Appointing members to the Planning Commission.

8. Appointing members to the Human Services and CDBG Funding Advisory Board.
9. Approving 2015 human services funding allocations and authorizing the execution of agreements for said services.
10. Awarding a bid for traffic signal upgrades – ITS Phase 4B fiber optic interconnectivity and video management system.
11. Approving the execution of interlocal agreements with the City of University Place, City of DuPont and Town of Steilacoom
for court services.
12. Approving the execution of an interlocal agreement with Pierce County relative to road maintenance services.
10. Authorizing the purchase of a dump truck chassis with snow plow attachments.
CITY COUNCIL COMMENTS
Councilmember Bocchi requested that Lakes High School Arts teacher Tracy Fortune be invited to a Council meeting to be
recognized for receiving the Washington State Arts Educator of the Year Award. He then commented on the Council report he
provided at the Clover Park School District Board meeting tonight.
Councilmember Moss commented on a military loans service business on Pacific Highway next to GEICO. Councilmember
Moss also commented on the SSMCP Elected Officials meeting she attended at the Eagles Pride Golf Course. She then
commented on the Volunteer Appreciation Breakfast.
Councilmember Barth spoke about the Youth Council and Arts Commission meeting she attended. She also commented on
the Volunteer Appreciation Breakfast and Christmas tree lighting ceremony she attended.
Councilmember Brandstetter commented on the Volunteer Appreciation Breakfast event. He then noted that he had been
receiving comments about the removal of trees at the Oakbrook Golf Course. He then spoke about the Christmas tree lighting
event and hoped that next year the Jingle Bell run can occur.
Deputy Mayor Whalen also commented on the Volunteer Appreciation Breakfast and Christmas tree lighting event and
suggested that business merchants be invited to be involved with the Jingle Bell run event next year. He then spoke about the
Rotary dinner he attended over weekend.
Councilmember Simpson commented on the cycle-cross races at Ft. Steilacoom Park he attended and that the world cup race
may be held in the park. Councilmember Simpson asked when the barn debris will be removed. Councilmember Simpson
indicated that he will not be attending the December 9, 2014 Joint Council and Legislators meeting.
Mayor Anderson commented on the Festivals of Trees event where he served as master of ceremonies representing
Lakewood. He then commented on the Volunteer Appreciation breakfast and the recognition plaque that citizens received.
**********
Executive Session
Mayor Anderson announced that Council will recess into Executive Session until 10:05 a.m. to discuss performance of a public
official until 10:05 p.m.
**********
Council recessed into Executive Session at 9:35 p.m. and reconvened at 10:05 p.m.
At 10:05 p.m. Mayor Anderson announced that Executive Session would be extended for 20 minutes until 10:25 p.m.
At 10:25 p.m. Mayor Anderson announced that Executive Session would be extended for 10 minutes until 10:35 p.m.
At 10:35 p.m. Mayor Anderson announced that Executive Session would be extended for 15 minutes until 10:50 p.m.
ADJOURNMENT
There being no further business, the meeting adjourned at 10:50 p.m.
_____________________________________
DON ANDERSON, MAYOR

ATTEST:

____________________________
ALICE M. BUSH, MMC
CITY CLERK

