LAKEWOOD CITY COUNCIL
STUDY SESSION MINUTES
Tuesday, February 12, 2019
City of Lakewood
City Council Chambers
6000 Main Street SW
Lakewood, WA 98499

CALL TO ORDER
Mayor Anderson called the meeting to order at 7:04 p.m.
ROLL CALL
Councilmembers Present: 7 - Mayor Don Anderson; Deputy Mayor Jason Whalen;
Councilmembers Mary Moss, Mike Brandstetter, John Simpson, Marie Barth and
Paul Bocchi.
ITEMS FOR DISCUSSION:
From Poverty to Possibilities Presentation.
Ms. Dona Ponepinto, President, United Way of Pierce County shared that United Way is
leading a movement to end poverty in Pierce County. She reported that ALICE is an
acronym for asset limited , income constrained, and employed individuals. She reported
that one in three households in Pierce County cannot afford the basics of housing, food,
healthcare, child care, and transportation despite working. She reviewed the
organizations family stability dashboard and related data. Discussion ensued.
Review of City website redesign.
Communications Manager Grimley presented City's new website and highlighted various
webpages.
Review agreement with Pierce County Sheriff's Department for SWAT Services.
Police Chief Zaro reviewed the proposed agreement with Pierce County to provide SWAT
response for incidents within the City.
Review of Quasi-Judicial code amendments.
Planning Manager Speir reviewed the hearings and decision making authority for different
types of land use actions in the City. She then reviewed the proposed amendments to the
Lakewood Municipal Code. She reported that a public hearing is scheduled for February

Lakewood City Council Minutes

-2-

February 12, 2019

19th and adoption of recommended code language scheduled for March 4th . Discussion
ensued.
Transportation Projects Update.

Public Works Engineering Director Bucich provided an update on Steilacoom Boulevard/
88th Street Weller Road to Custer Road project. Discussion ensued as to whether to
construct in phases or a single project.
Public Works Engineering Director Bucich provided an update on the 123 rd Street SW
project. He reviewed design options and available funds for the project. It was
recommended to move forward with option 1, allowing for curb, gutter and sidewalks on
both side of the roadway.
ITEMS TENTATIVELY SCHEDULED FOR THE FEBRUARY 19, 2019 REGULAR
CITY COUNCIL MEETING:

1.

Business showcase. - Pape' Kenworth Northwest, Mr. Cliff Williams, General
Manager

2.

Authorizing the execution of an agreement with the Humane Society for
Tacoma-Pierce County for animal sheltering services. - (Motion - Consent
Agenda)

3.

Authorizing the execution of an interlocal agreement with Pierce County
Sheriff's Department for SWAT services. - (Motion - Consent Agenda)

4.

Authorizing the sale of Police Canine Ranger as surplus property.
- (Resolution - Consent Agenda)

5.

Approving the final plat for Windom Oaks. - (Resolution - Consent Agenda)

6.

Initiating amendments to the zoning map for the parcels located from OSR2
to OSR 1. - (Resolution - Consent Agenda)

7.

This is the date set for a public hearing regarding a proposal to adopt
regulations related to creating a quasi-judicial hearing process and
addressing site-specific rezone code amendments. - (Public Hearings &
Appeals - Regular Agenda)

8.

Review of 4th Quarter Police Report. - (Reports by the City Manager)

REPORTS BY THE CITY MANAGER

City Manager Caulfield reported that the Maintenance and Operations crew has
continued to work responding to the weather related incidents of the past week. He
reported that the City used social media as our primary storm-related messaging
platform.

City Council Study Session Minutes

-3-

February 12, 2019

He then reported that the AWC City Action Days have been cancelled for this week.
The meetings scheduled with State Legislatures are still being held .
He then reported that February 22 nd is the legislative policy cutoff date.
CITY COUNCIL COMMENTS

Councilmember Moss shared that she attended the Lake City Neighborhood
Association meeting last week.
Councilmember Brandstetter commented on SSMCP Program Manager Sarah
Luna's acceptance into the Russell Family Foundation Jane's Fellowship Program.
Councilmember Barth commented on the City's storm response.
Mayor Anderson provided an overview of the meetings City officials attended at the
Pentagon and with federal delegation last week in Washington, D.C .
**********

Executive Session

Mayor Anderson announced that Council will recess into Executive Session for
approximately 15 minutes pursuant to RCW 42.30.110(1 )(b) to consider the
selection of a site or the acquisition of real estate by lease or purchase when public
knowledge regarding such consideration would cause a likelihood of increased
price. Council is not expected to take final action following executive session .
**********

Council recessed into Executive Session at 9:51 p.m. At 10:06 p.m., Mayor
Anderson announced that Executive Session will be extended for an additional five
minutes. Council reconvened at 10: 11 p.m.
ADJOURNMENT

There being no further business, the meeting adjourned at 10:11 p.m.

ATTEST:

01lai1.tL Sci1lLli taclu1

BRIANA SCHUMACHER
CITY CLERK

